Previously on Reign...
You were right.
As long as Mary's alive,
there will always be Catholics
who want her on your throne.
Unless you share it with
someone of their faith.
Archduke Ferdinand,
you certainly have
risen above your competition.
I am well aware you've been
looking for a Catholic king.
A king's confidence
is essential.
And you are a source
of Charles' confidence.
And you are the source
of my happiness.
HENRI: You're wasting your time
with the wrong man.
I'm talking
about Narcisse.
Round up every tax offender
and throw them
in debtor's jail at once.
CATHERINE:
Dear God, the Englishmen.
NARCISSE:
Spain wants Henri
on the throne.
And you do not have the power
to save Charles.
Darnley can't know.
He wants the Crown Matrimonial
very badly.
You must never let him
benefit from your death.
With the right people
on our side,
we can convince the council
to override Mary
and grant you
the Crown Matrimonial.
♪ ♪
English citizens believe they
can live and conduct business
on French soil and pay
nothing to the Crown.
We will show them
that they're wrong.
There is an English ship in
the docks christened Hopewell.
We will begin there.
♪ ♪
MAN:
Search the ship for the captain!
(clattering nearby)
Captain Evans,
I am Henri Valois,
brother to King Charles
of France.
Damn you
and damn your brother.
This ship sails under
the flag of England.
But is currently
in a French port.
Show me your manifest, I want
to know what cargo you carry.
Isn't it enough that your
brother already butchered
the man that
owns this ship?
It is not.
In the name of France,
I am seizing this ship
as well as the cargo it carries.
Remove Captain Evans and make
certain the ship does not sail
unless I authorize it.
This is an act of war!
Don't think that Queen Elizabeth
won't hear of it.
When did King Charles' brother
become the defender of France?
Perhaps he's following
Charles' orders.
We cannot afford to go
to war with France
over a few Englishmen
who chose to live in France.
I assure you,
I will negotiate
concessions from France
without risking
military action.
But we must also
project strength,
as the alliance between Spain
and France continues to grow.
Mm-hmm.
The archduke of Austria
is well-liked
by both Spain
and the Vatican.
We could use the fact
that he will soon be
my husband to our advantage.
What will I do with myself
while you're away in France?
I've grown so used
to having you
whenever I want.
I will miss that.
Hmm.
How about this?
While I'm gone, and you
are overcome with desire,
write it down.
We can read your pages
together when I return.
Well, in that case,
I will need to request
an extra large supply
of parchment and ink.
I have one son-- a king--
who beheads English nobles.
And another
wishing to be king,
who agitates Protestants
and seizes English ships.
They seem to be at war
with each other.
If we don't control them,
they'll soon have us
at war with England.
We have to return the ships.
What, and let France
appear weak?
No. Our best strategy,
once Lord Blackburn arrives,
is to at first
offer nothing.
Assume the upper hand.
England won't go to war over
a couple of merchant ships.
What about the nobles
that Charles slaughtered?
He was provoked.
He acted in self-defense.
A lie, and I trust
you have a good number
of witnesses
to support it?
It's the same story the king
will tell while in Paris.
Let's hope it's enough to calm
the jittery nerves
of our Protestant subjects
and avoid civil war.
I hear that Charles'
peasant lover, Nicole,
didn't accompany him
to Paris.
Do you know why?
Yes.
She wants time away
from her king,
so that she can
smother me
with her exhausting
affections.
Well, that's the price you
pay to control the woman
who controls the king.
Is it really so bad?
Each day I receive
some pointless gift.
And I am expected
to respond
and share my feelings.
It's dreadful.
Oh, such a burden.
(laughing):
I had no idea.
HENRI: Lord Chancellor,
you wished to see me?
Yes.
I thought you would
like to know
that Queen Elizabeth
is not happy.
I couldn't care less
if Elizabeth is happy or not.
No. You only care how you're
viewed by French nobles
and Spain.
Elizabeth is sending an envoy
to negotiate a settlement.
What's to negotiate?
English citizens
shouldn't be on French soil.
And if they must, then they
have to pay for the privilege.
With taxes.
While I do not disagree
with your beliefs...
Your antagonistic way
in which you are
expressing them
could plunge us into a war.
One we do not need or want.
Which is why
I will meet
with Lord Blackburn
and handle
the negotiations.
Alone.
Is that clear?
Of course.
♪ ♪
♪ Hold my head
inside your hands ♪
♪ Talk me through the hours ♪
♪ If I lost you,
all I'd say is ♪
♪ Oh, my, my ♪
♪ Oh... ♪
♪ Keep me safe. ♪
Lord Bothwell.
(door closes)
David.
I hope I haven't
kept you waiting.
Not at all.
Have you discovered
why the privy council has been
voting against every measure
I place before them?
They continue to blame you
for mishandling the money
for the disaster relief.
And you're Catholic,
a woman,
they consider
you a foreigner...
Darnley's been paying them.
BOTHWELL:
Yes, I was
getting to that, thank you.
Bribes. Quite large.
He's using them
to influence the most
powerful members of the council.
And what favor does he ask
of them in return?
He's requested
a special vote.
One that gives him
the Crown Matrimonial.
Over my objections?
The privy council
has such power.
If Darnley is granted
the Crown Matrimonial,
it makes him my equal.
But in their eyes, my superior!
And because
he is a man,
the privy council will
look to him and not me.
We cannot let him succeed,
or they will be one step closer
to eliminating me.
I need a plan that gives
me power with the privy council.
If I can force them
to take my side over Darnley's,
then I'll be able
to protect my throne.
And I believe I have a plan
that just may work.
Lord Blackburn.
Lord Chancellor.
Don't tell me they
sent you to greet me.
Oh, I thought
it'd give us some time
to spend together
informally
before we begin
our negotiations.
Well, wonderful.
Then may I ask, informally,
why the king's brother Henri
has become so...
active in
French politics?
Ah, he supports the king,
nothing more.
And the Spanish galleons
anchored off shore,
do they also
support the king?
It's no secret that France and
Spain share a very close tie.
The Vatican is prepared
to stand behind Elizabeth.
She's soon be wed to a Catholic,
King Philip's nephew,
the archduke of Austria.
Hmm. I do believe
our king trumps your archduke.
Hmm. Mm.
Please.
NARCISSE:
"Restitution for the life
"of each murdered
English subject.
"Return of all seized ships
and cargo, and...
formal apology?"
Mm, something in writing
would be preferred.
France objects to your use
of the word "murder."
Your English lords
were not murdered,
they were executed
when they threatened the king.
"Threatened"?
Really?
There will be no apology,
formal or otherwise.
And no payment.
As for the ships, England
may buy them back.
France is owed taxes,
and we intend to collect.
However, as I am not
an unreasonable man,
I might be persuaded
to give back
the ships' cargo as
a sign of good will.
In the eyes of the world,
you have committed murder
and theft.
A military response from England
will be seen as justified.
So I strongly urge you
to reconsider your position.
(door closes)
How are the negotiations going?
We're still talking.
Whatever you do, do not
give England the cargo
from the ships.
Why?
Because we've been handed
an unexpected gift.
The cargo is saltpeter.
The English transport
it from North Africa
to make gunpowder. Gunpowder
they will use against France.
Or Spain.
Oh, how tragic for Spain.
And tell me, is Spain aware
of this cargo
captured in France?
You told your
sister, the queen.
She's requested that we divert
the saltpeter to Spain.
So, now Spain asks you to meddle
in France's affairs
on their behalf.
I'm working with Spain
to clean up the mess
that Charles has created
with England.
All they ask for
in return is the saltpeter
to make
ammunition.
I am working with Spain.
And you would be wise
to work with me.
(birds squawking)
This is a glorious day
for all of Scotland.
God has smiled upon us.
I stand before you
with great joy,
to announce to you,
and the world,
that I am blessed and honored
to carry within me an heir.
(cheering, applause)
An heir with a claim to both the
Scottish and English thrones.
I think it would please them
very much
to hear from the father.
ALL (chanting): Long live
the king! Long live the king!
Long live the king!
The queen and I
are very much looking forward
to the arrival of our child.
And we thank you
for allowing us
to share this blessed
news with you.
(all cheering, clamoring)
Thank you.
(indistinct chatter)
That was a brilliant move.
But how did you know
that Darnley wouldn't
make good on his threat
and deny the child was his?
I didn't give him time to think.
My husband is
not a complex man.
He just wants to be
loved and adored.
I simply gave him an
opportunity to feed his ego.
(chuckles)
Well, now that you've claimed
the child as your own,
you've given up
our leverage with the queen.
We'll need a new way
to rid ourselves of her.
Rid ourselves?
I'm not looking to do away
with Mary.
All I want is
the Crown Matrimonial...
to be her equal.
Thanks to you,
it's now too late for that.
So, you want to kill her?
Is that what
you're suggesting?
She carries the future heir.
No one, not even a child,
is innocent.
And as long as this woman
is allowed to draw breath,
she will continue to ruin
this land as completely
as she has ruined everything
and everyone that I love.
There has to be another way.
Well, I'm afraid
I'm out of ideas...
unless you've got one?
Think hard.
I've received news
from Bothwell.
Your plan was a success.
Nearly all the
council members
who were prepared
to grant Darnley
the Crown Matrimonial
have changed their minds.
They know that
it will make them
very unpopular
to vote against a queen
who carries the heir
to the throne.
How many minds
have remained unchanged?
Only one that matters.
Lord Ruthven.
We already know
that the lord treasurer
isn't above accepting bribes,
but I'm willing to bet
that his dishonesty
goes further than that.
You're familiar
with bookkeeping.
I would like you
to find
the privy council ledgers
and see if there's evidence
of any further
financial wrongdoing.
I'll request the ledger at once.
David.
I don't know how to thank you
for all you've done for me.
With my brother,
James, gone,
and Greer away...
I feel as though
I can trust you with my life.
You can.
This is my home now.
And you are my friend.
Thank you.
A queen doesn't have
many friends.
I treasure you.
(chuckles lightly)
HENRI:
With Charles in Paris,
I thought we could
get to know each other
a little better.
Is that what
this stroll is?
Yes. You're important
to my brother and my family,
and I realized
I hardly know you.
Yet, you thought you
knew me well enough
to tell me that I'm
with the wrong man.
Because I know Narcisse and
I was trying to protect you.
Protect me? Why?
You hardly know me.
Which brings us back
to why I asked you on a stroll.
So, let's start
at the beginning.
Tell me how you came
to be here at court.
I'm sure you've heard my story.
The simple farm girl who rose
to become the king's mistress.
You're so much
more than that.
I don't think my brother
would be king without you.
Charles is quite capable.
With you whispering
in his ear
after Narcisse has
whispered in yours.
You think Narcisse
is manipulating me?
I think you're a beautiful,
ambitious, young woman
who's learned
to pull the strings of men,
and yet can't see when her
own strings are being pulled.
You're still
a naive farm girl at heart.
You don't know
what you're talking about.
Thanks for the stroll.
He doesn't love you any more
than you love my brother.
Meet me tomorrow,
I'll prove it to you...
before he breaks your heart.
As for your demands,
on further review,
France's position
has changed.
I'm glad to hear that.
You still have the option
to buy back the ships,
but I'm afraid the cargo
is now property of France.
You were prepared
to return the cargo.
But you failed to disclose
the contents of the cargo:
saltpeter.
A fertilizer.
Oh, don't patronize me.
We both know it is used
to produce gunpowder.
This is hardly a negotiation.
Your hard-line stance
threatens war with England.
Why would you risk that?
I can't help but feel
you're driven by something
much more personal.
Revenge.
My queen
executed your wife.
I understand your bitterness,
but don't let your grudge
push our countries to war.
Elizabeth had no choice.
She suffers from the
loss of Lola as well.
Oh, she suffers?
No one understands loss
until they've felt it.
I do.
I lost my wife
and then my daughter.
I went through a period
where I hated the whole world.
And what helped you to recover?
Love.
And I don't mean just
finding someone to love.
What healed me was
knowing that I was loved,
more than I ever
thought possible.
Well, I'm happy
for your good fortune.
Allow yourself to love
and be loved again,
or the bitterness
will just destroy you.
That is wise advice.
So I have some
advice for you.
The Spanish are not here
because France and Spain
are getting on well.
They're there to show support
for Prince Henri.
Imagine how that
makes the king feel.
So I think if you were
to talk with King Charles,
you would be surprised
how receptive he might be
to your demands.
Lord Ruthven, my advisor,
David Rizzio,
has found some discrepancies
in the privy council ledger.
You are responsible
for that ledger, are you not?
Your advisor is obviously wrong.
He has found proof
that in addition
to cheating the Crown,
you have also been swindling
your fellow nobles.
How do you think
they will respond
when they discover
the lord treasurer is a crook,
stealing from them?
Perhaps you should discuss this
with the king.
I'm certain he will find that
I have done nothing wrong.
If you expect Lord Darnley
to pardon you,
it will do you no good,
not if I make this public.
You'll lose your standing,
your reputation, your friends.
And you will remain silent
if I vote against giving Darnley
the Crown Matrimonial?
What has happened to Scotland?
The queen is more French
than Scottish...
and takes the word of an Italian
over her own treasurer.
I will keep my trust
in the king.
Lord Ruthven, wait.
What is it now?
I beg of you.
Under no circumstances
must you allow Darnley
to receive
the Crown Matrimonial.
Why?
What new threat
does the queen offer?
It's not a threat
from the queen.
This is my threat alone.
There are places
that men frequent
when they desire the discreet
companionship of other men.
You've been seen at such places.
I'm married.
Even so,
you and I have known the company
of the same gentleman.
You be very careful
what you're suggesting.
We take no pleasure
in revealing your secret.
It's not an easy life,
desiring what we're told
we should not.
But if you defy the queen,
I will make certain
that everyone knows
we are the same,
and not even the king
will be able to save you then.
Nor you.
You'll be burned
right alongside me.
Are you prepared for that?
For Mary... anything.
How the hell did we
lose Ruthven?!
He won't even discuss
the Crown Matrimonial.
That was our last chance at
a peaceful transition of power.
Time to take out Mary.
No.
You asked me if I
had a better idea.
I do.
We can try Mary for adultery.
Carnal lusting.
Even though she's pregnant?
Mary is a woman of passion.
Whatever she feels,
desires, she must act upon.
She once took me in the hallway
before our wedding.
If her desires are not
being fulfilled with me,
then surely with Bothwell.
Women are capable
of ungodly things.
We must catch
them together,
with witnesses to make certain
she's found guilty of adultery.
And then what?
She'll be forced to abdicate.
But she will... live?
Yes.
She'll be banished
or imprisoned,
but she'll live.
And the privy council
will empower me to rule.
I am the father
of the next monarch.
In a heartbeat.
Adultery is a just cause.
Once she's judged as immoral
and unfit, the Vatican itself
will push her off the throne,
leaving you.
And what about Bothwell?
Well, that's up to the king.
Well, in that case...
I will have his head.
ELIZABETH:
I wasn't expecting
the archduke back so soon.
What do you think he wants?
Was he not away to draw up
papers for your engagement?
Perhaps he now wishes
your permission
to make a formal
announcement.
Do you think?
Now that the world knows
Queen Mary is pregnant,
I need this alliance
more than ever.
But still, I can't help
but feel I'm cheating on Gideon.
Lord Blackburn loves you as much
as any man has loved a woman.
He understands
the situation.
Smile.
(sighs)
(chuckles)
(laughing):
My lord,
you have certainly...
What is it?
"Your lips... hungry...
"devour me.
They steal my breath.
"Your body is mine.
Our hearts beat
in joined ecstasy."
I apologize for reading
your private papers.
I was moving them
to make room for the flowers.
Are you involved
with another man?
You weren't supposed
to see those
before our
wedding night.
I beg your pardon?
Ever since we met,
I can't stop thinking about you.
Your...
powerful gaze,
your confident stride.
You've driven me mad
with desire.
Which is
inappropriate
for a queen.
Especially a virgin queen.
I've been inspired,
by the things
that I've read in secret,
to write down
my deepest longings,
so that I might
share them with you
after we were married.
The queen of England
reads erotica?
Mm-hmm.
My queen,
if I had only known
your feelings toward me,
I could have spared us
so much grief.
Because I feel
the same way.
Forgive my boldness,
but is there any reason
we should deny ourselves
any longer
of something we both
so clearly want?
I've returned from Austria
with my family's blessing.
They've agreed
to your demands.
We shall soon be
husband and wife.
I can think of no reason at all.
I will give flesh to your words.
And I'll be gentle.
Hmm.
(exhales)
That's remarkable.
Subtle use of form without
sacrificing attention to detail.
Is it a, uh--?
It's a Da Vinci.
Ah.
My grandfather
Francis purchased it.
But you didn't come here
to discuss my art collection,
did you?
No, Your Majesty.
I came with the hope
of resolving
the situation in Granville.
I understood Lord Narcisse
was handling those negotiations.
I've learned something
that is-is too sensitive
for anyone except for
the king himself.
Spain is trying to
influence the outcome.
My investigation into the
disputed ships and their cargo
has revealed that
your brother, Henri,
intends to send
them to Spain,
at Spain's behest.
Tread lightly, Lord Blackburn.
You are suggesting
that my brother
goes behind my back
and works against me
to do Spain's bidding.
Forgive me if I am overstepping.
As a diplomat,
it appears to me
that Spain would like to see
our countries at war.
They would use it as an
invitation to help France,
stepping in and elevating
your brother's power.
And if I were to return the
ships and cargo to England?
Then there's no cause for war
between our countries.
And you would have
shown Spain--
and your brother--
who truly wields
the power in France.
Bothwell?
You are in grave danger.
I just received word
from one of my spies
that your privy council is
planning to overthrow you,
and your worthless traitor
of a husband
is helping them.
Darnley means
to remove you from power.
I've asked Rizzio
to keep watch,
but everyone at this court
is a potential conspirator.
The act of a desperate man.
I have stopped all
of Darnley's attempts
at gaining
the Crown Matrimonial.
Knox and the privy council must
have promised him my throne.
Which means they're not above
taking it by force.
We must leave court
and get to safety, now.
No.
I must show strength.
We can't risk you
coming to harm--
I am the rightful
monarch of Scotland.
You go.
Collect those loyal to me
and regroup somewhere
defensible.
I could go to Dunbar.
I have friends there,
unwavering royalists.
Your Majesty, Bothwell...
Darnley and Lord Ruthven
are headed this way.
Are you certain it was him?
It was Lord Bothwell,
I swear.
He entered
the queen's chambers?
I saw it with my own eyes.
You have to leave now.
I'll send word when I can.
Muster our forces and prepare
to storm the castle.
I'll wait in Dunbar.
David, what are you doing?
You need to go, too.
No. Whatever they try,
I'll be your witness.
There's no more time. Go.
Whatever happens, I'll
always be on your side.
You're the queen.
They can't change that.
Remember, we need Bothwell
for this to work.
Do not let him escape.
Where is Bothwell? Huh?
Show yourself, coward!
Is that your plan?
To accuse me of
adultery with Bothwell?
Did you warn him?
Let him slither out of here
like the snake that he is?
The queen and I have been
alone here for the past hour.
I have no idea
where Bothwell is.
Like I told you,
I have remained
faithful to our vows.
I am innocent.
No, you're not, and we're
here to bring you to justice.
How dare you barge in here
with an empty claim.
If you stand down now,
I am willing to pardon
all of you for this treason,
the punishment
for which is death.
Do you want her off
the throne or not?
Are you blind?
Without Bothwell,
we have no proof.
We have found the queen alone
in her chambers with a man.
The Italian will
serve our purpose.
No one will believe you,
and you know why.
What's he talking about?
Lies, no doubt.
What's it matter?
This is our opportunity
to rid ourselves
of this French imposter,
this whore of a queen,
like we've wanted.
There can be no backing down.
We kill the Italian,
but we do this together.
No one person to blame.
You can't let them murder
an innocent man!
Ruthven, this was
never the plan.
This is not the time
for fear or weakness.
Tonight we make history.
Tonight we take back Scotland
from the woman
who stole the throne.
This is my final warning.
Stand down.
Stand up, I say,
to her tyranny.
We've come too far
now to back down.
We must act as one
for Scotland.
Please.
(shouts)
MARY:
No! David!
(crying): No. No. No.
Are we in this together
or aren't we?
No! No!
You can't just let
them murder him!
For Scotland!
MARY: No!
(Rizzio and Mary shout)
No!
For Scotland!
(grunts)
MARY: No!
No!
(groans)
(crying):
David! No!
No!
No! No!
David!
No!
(crying):
Let me go.
No.
No! No!
Let me go!
(Mary crying)
(crying):
What have you done?
Is this really necessary?
I don't need to see
Narcisse's reaction to my gift
to prove that he loves me.
Then you have nothing
to worry about.
They're coming.
Get behind the screen.
I haven't yet heard back
from Gideon,
but I'm certain that I
have sent him on a course
that will deliver us
each what we desire.
Oh.
(Catherine chuckles)
CATHERINE: "So that I may stay
close to your beating heart,
always. Nicole."
(laughing):
Isn't that adorable?
Oh, joy, she's
found a new way
to suffocate me.
Now I'm expected
to carry this
vile, little locket.
She's so tedious,
feigning affection
while feeling nothing.
If it weren't for the effect
she has over Charles,
this would be more
work than it is worth.
I find that hard to believe.
Hmm?
This comes easily to you.
I've seen it.
No, experienced it myself.
Yes, but at least,
in your case,
we were equally matched.
CATHERINE:
Look at us.
After all
we've been through,
all we've lost,
the two of us,
we're still here.
Keeping the kingdom
from falling apart.
Oh, together,
we really are a force
to be reckoned with.
When I told you
to get over the loss of Lola,
I didn't mean for you to sleep
with every woman in the castle,
which is what I hear
you've been doing.
And does that...
bother you?
CATHERINE:
I was controlling.
Yeah.
Not cloying.
And never once dull.
Never.
So, no, this time,
it doesn't bother me.
Ah.
This time?
I do like the sound of that.
(muffled crying)
RUTHVEN:
For Scotland!
MARY:
No! No! David!
(groans)
I think there's something
wrong with the baby.
I need my husband.
I am under strict orders
not to leave you unguarded.
This is your king's child.
Go!
(groans)
(exhales)
Mary.
Your Majesty.
(door closes)
Are you all right?
Is the baby...?
I'll summon for a
physician right away.
No, the baby is fine.
I needed to talk
to you in private.
Knox is using you.
Mary, it's over.
The coup was a success!
You have to accept your fate.
And what about your fate?
Who is in power now, hmm?
You or the privy council?
It's only temporary.
It all happened so fast, they
said it would take time, but...
What did Knox promise you?
That while I rotted
in jail for an affair
that never happened, that
they would make you king?
You, an Englishman,
a Catholic?
I'll convert, and then I'll take
the English throne, too.
Don't be a fool.
We are married because
I couldn't take
England without you.
What makes you think that you
can take England without me?
Knox may despise me,
but he hates the idea
of a monarchy even more.
You will never be safe.
Well, I-I...
They killed Rizzio.
They will turn on you,
as easily
as they turned
on me, as easily
as they turned to murder.
I never intended
for Rizzio to die.
All I wanted
was to catch you with Bothwell.
There was nothing to catch.
I have been faithful to you.
Darnley.
They will kill you.
What am I to do?
Help me escape the castle.
No.
Help me,
and we will get back
all that is ours,
as king and queen together.
Or stay...
and be cast off by
those who have used you.
NICOLE:
How could I have been so naive?
All this time,
I gave myself to him.
How can I erase those sounds,
seared into my brain?
You didn't know
they were lovers?
Lord, no.
I knew Narcisse
didn't care about you,
but had no idea about them.
(cries)
Oh.
There, there, Nicole.
I truly am sorry.
I just felt that you
deserved the truth.
You deserve someone
that cares for you,
and I don't mean
a weak, boy king.
I mean me.
You don't care about me.
I do.
No.
My God, look at you.
How could I not?
Narcisse is a fool,
an utter fool,
and someday,
when you're with the right man,
someone he knows
he's truly lost you to,
he will realize that.
(man grunts)
I have a trusted servant
waiting south of the castle
with horses.
If we're going to escape,
we have to do it now.
I can walk on my own.
♪ There's a fire raging
on inside under my skin ♪
♪ Hear the glass
as it shatters ♪
♪ Yeah, it's breakin'
like my bones... ♪
(man shouting nearby)
♪ With all my soul, no ♪
♪ I am not the one
who is gonna be fadin'... ♪
There's a path that
will lead us outside.
So, this is how you pulled off
that disappearing act.
♪ There must be a better place
away from me ♪
♪ No, I won't give up ♪
♪ I will die searching ♪
♪ I'm fighting ♪
♪ Till I win this war ♪
♪ Till I win
this war ♪
♪ I'm fighting ♪
♪ Hear my battle cry ♪
♪ Oh, oh ♪
♪ Hear my battle cry. ♪
Are you all right?
Maybe you should rest.
We've been riding for hours,
and in your condition...
Dunbar is close.
Bothwell will be waiting.
Without us, the conspirators
have no leverage.
We must strike now,
while they are weak.
Mary.
I'm so sorry.
Rizzio didn't deserve
to die like that.
No, he didn't.
You will get justice for him,
but if I come with you,
I know that Bothwell will say
that that justice
means my death.
All I've ever wanted
was to be treated with respect.
I don't want to die.
Darnley, don't leave.
Come with me.
It's my only chance at survival.
Where will you go?
Somewhere where
I won't be found.
Darnley, no.
Take care, you and the baby.
(both lightly chuckle)
I can't stop staring at you.
I am smitten.
And I thought after last
night, our intimacy,
it's time to make
things official.
It's beautiful.
However, there is one
thing we must discuss
before moving forward.
I want our relationship to be
built on trust and honesty.
Of course.
As do I.
I know that those words you
wrote were not meant for me.
I'm guessing
they were written
for Gideon Blackburn.
I've observed you together.
You are... different
when he is near.
Lighter.
That's not true.
I don't believe you.
If you are so sure
of my feelings for him,
then you tricked me
into sleeping with you.
Because I had to show you
what we could be together.
What am I?
A fool.
No, you're not.
You're brilliant,
and you're gorgeous,
and you're willing
to marry me for your country.
But that's not enough
for me.
Because your attention
has been elsewhere, and oddly
because you need this marriage,
you weren't giving me a chance.
To show me who you are.
I think I know now.
I'm the man who held you
in his arms for hours,
but I did not force you,
and I don't believe you forced
your response to me last night.
Did you?
Be honest with me.
It's all right
to enjoy sex, Elizabeth,
especially with one's husband,
which is what
I still want to be.
Even knowing I have feelings
for another?
I believe you
could have feelings for me,
stronger feelings.
But the truth is we both
need this marriage to work.
Me, to shore up
my country's finances.
And you,
to gain Catholic support
to counter Mary's aggression.
If we wed, you need
never fear her again,
and together,
we would be unstoppable.
But you must stop
whatever is happening
between you
and Gideon Blackburn.
I will.
And you must remove him
from court.
I don't want to see
him here again.
Those are my terms.
They are not negotiable.
All right.
I will send him away.
My congratulations,
Lord Blackburn,
on your brilliant
diplomacy.
You have achieved everything
you set out to do.
Your queen has returned her
ships and valuable cargo,
and the English
residents of Granville
no longer need
fear reprisals.
Thanks to you,
Lord Narcisse, it's...
it's all worked out well.
I have to ask.
Why did you guide me?
I thought it might be nice
if we both claim a victory.
You, for your queen.
Me, to ensure that France
remains independent from Spain.
You're an exemplary statesman.
Mm.
Setting aside
your personal feelings
for the good
of your country.
Lola would be proud of you.
Well, it's time to bury
the past, move on.
I wish you a safe journey
back to your queen, Gideon.
I hope she shows
great appreciation
for what you achieved here.
Hm.
♪ ♪
(footsteps approaching)
You sent for me, brother?
On this throne,
I'm your king.
You'd do well
to remember that.
I stand chastened, Your Majesty.
But why?
(chuckles)
Be grateful you're
still standing at all.
I know what you've been up to.
I unraveled your little plot
pitting England and France
against each other
strengthening your
friends in Spain.
I'm not sure--
Don't try to deny it!
You'd plunge France
into war to sate
your lust for my crown,
but you have failed.
You will never have
what belongs to me--
is that clear?
As crystal...
Your Majesty.
With your forces, we should have
enough men to retaliate.
We'll continue
to recruit troops overnight.
If we don't hear from Queen Mary
by the morning,
we'll attack.
MARY:
Lord Bothwell.
(pants)
(men clamoring)
Your Majesty.
You're here. What happened?
I convinced Darnley
to help me escape.
He feared for his life--
rightly so--
and went his own way.
The castle is still in the hands
of the conspirators.
What of Rizzio?
They wanted
to accuse me of adultery,
and when they didn't find you...
they butchered David.
He was a good man.
(sighs)
Your loyalty to the Crown in
this time will not be forgotten.
Your sovereign queen
has been betrayed,
in an unforgivable way.
But the conspirators
will not live long enough
to gloat about their treachery.
At dawn,
we will take back the castle,
and the traitors will pay
for what they have done
with their lives!
Captioning sponsored by
CBS PRODUCTIONS